docs(auth): running Lighthouse on authenticated pages (#9628)
GoogleChrome/lighthouse: docs/auth/README.md

# Running Lighthouse on Authenticated Pages

> Standard usages of Lighthouse processes a page as a new user, with no previous session or storage data. This means that pages requiring authenticated access do not work without some additional setup. There are multiple ways to run Lighthouse on an authenticated page - this document focuses on the most flexible approach (Puppeteer), but mentions other approaches briefly at the end.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Default runs of Lighthouse load a page as a "new user", with no previous session or storage data. This means that pages requiring authenticated access do not work. There are multiple ways to run Lighthouse on an authenticated page - this document focuses on the most flexible approach ([Puppeteer](https://pptr.dev)), but mentions other approaches briefly at the end.
```

If you just want to view the code, see `./example-lh-auth.js`.

## The Example Site

There are two pages on the site:

1. `/` - the homepage
2. `/dashboard`

The homepage shows the login form, but only to users that are not signed in.

The dashboard shows a secret to users that are logged in, but shows an error to users that are not.

The server responds with different HTML for each of these pages and session states, so there are four different pages that must have passable Lighthouse SEO scores.

> You can run this server locally if you like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run the server:
```

Author: Loses important meaning that this is optional.

Reviewer 2: The way we (technical writers) usually handle that is:

```
(Optional) To run the server:
```

Keeps it concise while also keeping the information about optional-ity

```sh
# be in root lighthouse directory
yarn # install global project deps
cd docs/auth
yarn # install deps related to just this documentation
yarn start # start the server on http://localhost:8000
```

## Puppeteer

> We will use Puppeteer to open a Chrome browser and setup our state by filling and submitting a login form. We'll designate a specific port for Chrome to open a debugging session, so that we can pass the same port to Lighthouse.

Reviewer: I kind of want an outline of the whole process here that is worded more clearly of the whole process.

```suggestion
Puppeteer is a Browser automation tool that allows us to manipulate a browser session via code. We will use it to:
1. Create a new browser session.
2. Fill in a login form on a page.
3. Pass that authenticated session to Lighthouse.
```

> To launch Chrome:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First we'll launch Chrome:
```

```js

> const PORT = 8041;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// This PORT will be passed to Lighthouse for remote debugging
const PORT = 8041;
```

const browser = await puppeteer.launch({
  args: [`--remote-debugging-port=${PORT}`],
});
```

> Open the homepage, where the login form is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we'll go to the homepage:
```

```js
const page = await browser.newPage();
await page.goto('http://localhost:8000');
```

> Given a login form that looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The homepage contains a form with this DOM tree:
```

Author: i don't like this. Do you not like the word `given`?

also, and this is gonna be pedantic so plz dont hate me: this isn't a DOM tree - DOM is the model in memory, which is represented textually via html. or it could be xml. etc.

Reviewer: Yeah I really don't like the word `given` here.  I think it should be more simply worded.

Lol, fine, `The homepage contains a web form with this layout:`

Reviewer 3: fwiw, I prefer connor's original text to this new one. "a web form with this layout" sounds like it's trying to be technical but getting it wrong because that's not a layout below it

`Given a login form like this:` seems fine to me 🤷‍♂

```html
<form action="/login" method="post">
  <label>
    Email:
    <input type="email" name="email">
  </label>
  <label>
    Password:
    <input type="password" name="password">
  </label>
  <input type="submit">
</form>
```

We direct Puppeteer to fill and submit it:
```js
const emailInput = await page.$('input[type="email"]');
await emailInput.type('admin@example.com');
const passwordInput = await page.$('input[type="password"]');
await passwordInput.type('password');
const submitInput = await page.$('input[type="submit"]');
await submitInput.press('Enter');
await page.waitForNavigation();
```

At this point, the session that Puppeteer is managing is now logged into our site.

> We can close the page we used to login:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can close the page we used to login:
Note: The session still maintains the authenticated state.
```

```js
await page.close();
```

> All that's left to do now is run Lighthouse, using the same port as before:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can reuse the logged in session from Puppeteer in Lighthouse. Simply pass in the `PORT` from before:
```

# Running Lighthouse on Authenticated Pages

Default runs of Lighthouse load a page as a "new user", with no previous session or storage data. This means that pages requiring authenticated access do not work. There are multiple ways to run Lighthouse on an authenticated page - this document focuses on the most flexible approach ([Puppeteer](https://pptr.dev)), but mentions other approaches briefly at the end.

> If you just want to view the code, see [./example-lh-auth.js](example-lh-auth.js).

Author: no i meant this, but looking at it now i don't like it.

## The Example Site

There are two pages on the site:

1. `/` - the homepage
2. `/dashboard`

The homepage shows the login form, but only to users that are not signed in.

The dashboard shows a secret to users that are logged in, but shows an error to users that are not.

The server responds with different HTML for each of these pages and session states, so there are four different pages that must have passable Lighthouse SEO scores.

You can run this server locally if you like:

```sh
# be in root lighthouse directory
yarn # install global project deps
cd docs/auth
yarn # install deps related to just this documentation
yarn start # start the server on http://localhost:8000
```

## Puppeteer

> We can use Puppeteer - a browser automation tool - to manipulate a setup a session programatically.

Reviewer 2: `to manipulate a setup a session` 

there's some extra words here

1. Launch a new browser.
1. Navigate to the login page.
1. Fill and submit the login form.
1. Run Lighthouse using the same browser.

> First we launch Chrome:

Reviewer 2: I usually avoid "we" because it makes the subject of the action ambiguous. In this case "we're" not doing anything, we're telling the reader to do something. In this context it's more of a nitpick --- I don't think anyone will get lost in this doc --- but sometimes it does become an instructional issue.

https://developers.google.com/style/person

```js
// This port will be used by Lighthouse later.
const PORT = 8041;
const browser = await puppeteer.launch({
  args: [`--remote-debugging-port=${PORT}`],
});
```

> We navigate to the homepage, where the login form is:

Reviewer 3: nit: feels like we could just say `We navigate to our login form`, homepage fact doesn't seem to matter much

```js
const page = await browser.newPage();
await page.goto('http://localhost:8000');
```

Given a login form that looks like this:
```html
<form action="/login" method="post">
  <label>
    Email:
    <input type="email" name="email">
  </label>
  <label>
    Password:
    <input type="password" name="password">
  </label>
  <input type="submit">
</form>
```

We direct Puppeteer to fill and submit it:
```js
const emailInput = await page.$('input[type="email"]');
await emailInput.type('admin@example.com');
const passwordInput = await page.$('input[type="password"]');
await passwordInput.type('password');
const submitInput = await page.$('input[type="submit"]');

> await submitInput.press('Enter');

Reviewer 3: is this really the recommended way to submit forms with pptr?

Author: spoke to the man himself, he recs `$eval` for this.

> await page.waitForNavigation();

Reviewer 3: IIRC, @JoelEinbinder once told me I should be changing all my order of operations to

```js
await Promise.all([
  submitInput.click(),
  page.waitForNavigation(),
])
```

I'm not sure I ever noticed things going awry with the way you have it now though

Author: done. found this necessary w/ the eval submit approach

```

At this point, the session that Puppeteer is managing is now logged into our site.

We can close the page we used to login:
```js
await page.close();
// The page has been closed, but the browser still has the relevant session.
```

Now we run Lighthouse, using the same port as before:
```js
const result = await lighthouse('http://localhost:8000/dashboard', { port: PORT });
await browser.close();
const lhr = result.lhr;
```

## Puppetter in Your Integration Tests

> See [./example-lh-auth.test.js](example-lh-auth.test.js) for an example of how to run Lighthouse in your Jest tests on pages in both an authenticated and non-authenticated session.

Reviewer 3: same thing about the link text

## Other Approaches

### Chrome DevTools

> The Audits panel in Chrome DevTools will never clear your session cookies, so you can log in to the target site and run Lighthouse without being logged out. If local storage or IndexDB is important for your authentication purposes, be sure to uncheck `Clear storage`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Audits panel in Chrome DevTools will never clear your session cookies, so you can log in to the target site and run Lighthouse without being logged out. If `localStorage` or `indexedDB` is important for your authentication purposes, be sure to uncheck `Clear storage`.
```

Reviewer 3: just to make it clearer we are talking about very specific web apis

### Headers

CLI:
```sh
lighthouse http://www.example.com --view --extra-headers="{\"Authorization\":\"...\"}"
# or

> lighthouse http://www.example.com --view --extra-headers=./path/to/secret/headers.json

Reviewer 3: since we intend to deprecate this usage and steer toward `--cli-flags-path` should we just skip mentioning it?

```

Node:
```js
const result = await lighthouse('http://www.example.com', {
  extraHeaders: {
    Authorization: '...',
  },
});
```

> You could also set the `Cookie` header, but beware: it will [override any other Cookies you expect to be there](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/lighthouse/pull/9170). A workaround is to use Puppeteer's [page.setCookie](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/puppeteer/blob/master/docs/api.md#pagesetcookiecookies).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You could also set the `Cookie` header, but beware: it will [override any other Cookies you expect to be there](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/lighthouse/pull/9170). A workaround is to use Puppeteer's [`page.setCookie`](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/puppeteer/blob/master/docs/api.md#pagesetcookiecookies).
```

[`page.setCookie`](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/puppeteer/blob/master/docs/api.md#pagesetcookiecookies)

> ### Chrome User Profile

Reviewer 4: we should incorporate the content in https://github.com/GoogleChrome/lighthouse/tree/auth-docs/docs#testing-on-a-site-with-authentication

as awkward as it is, people do use it this way successfully

Author: done
